The Origins of the Cold War
	Breakdown of USA and USSR alliance in 1945-46
		Atomic Bomb
		Poland and the Warsaw Uprising of August 1944
			Did not help with British efforts but let civilians die
			USSR tried to inject own ideologies into Eastern Europe
		Russian Civil war and opposing ideologies
		Russian exit from WW1
		exclusion of USSR from the post WW1 peace conferences, not rewarded by Paris peace conference
		Anti-communist view in America
		Russia lost 28 million people, 60x more than the US
		Delay in D-Day in 1944
		Rush to Berlin and Russian history of Expansionism
		Poor relations between Truman and Stalin
	NATO and Warsaw Pact
		NATO
			Protective military alliance between western countries
			11 states, Denmark, ITALY, NORWAY, Portugal, Belgium, Netherlands and Luxembourg
			
			Meant that if any of these countries were attacked they would have to deal with nuclear bombs of USA and other countries
			Aim to deter attacks
			Created as part of a arms race, ussr nuclear bomb
		Warsaw Pact
			Consisted of Albania, Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, East Germany, Hungary, Poland, Romania, Soviet Union
			
			Dominated by soviet union
			Allowed the ussr to strengthen forces and created a further mechanism to keep the eater bloc countries in line
	The 1945 summit conferences 
		Potsdam (JANE)
			Key Facts
				Took place from 17 July - 2August 1945 in Berlin
				The conference was held between Truman, Churchill and Attlee (mid conference the Conservatives were heavily defeated), Stalin.
			Reparation
				Any thing of value could be taken for reparations from their zonee
				It was also agreed to exchange raw materials from specific zones with each other
			Japan
				Russia would join the war in the Far East
			Eastern Europe
				Eastern Europe would be seen as in 'a Soviet sphere of influence'.
			Poland
				The eastern border of Poland was agreed to shift left to the Oder/Neisse Line
			Germany
				Germany was to be seen as one economic unit
				Germany was to be democratised and free election were to be held. 
				Germany was to be demilitarised
		Yalta (JUDE)
			Key Facts
				Took place from 4 -11 February 1945 in Ukraine . 
				The conference was held between Stalin (wanted to make sure that the Polish government were friendly to the USSR as he was concerned with the security of the USSR), Roosevelt (wanted to keep democracy in the West), Churchill (wanted to stop communism from spreading).
				It took place because it was clear that Germany was losing the European War so the allied Leaders met in Yalta to plan what would happen to Europe after Germany's defeat.
			France
				Stalin agreed to recognise France as one of the four powers
			Germany
				Germany was be divided into four zones (American, British, French and Soviet) and Berlin would also be divided into four zones.
			United Nations
				They agreed to all join the UN organisation which would ain=m to keep a lasting peace after the war.
			Japan
				Stalin agreed to enter war against Japan after Germany had surrendered.
			Eastern Europe and Poland
				The USSR agreed not to interfere in Greece where the British were attempting to prevent a communist take over.
				The polish border would be moved West into Germany
				New governments were to be set up with Communists and Democrats
			The Declaration on Liberates Europe
				They agreed as countries were liberated from German occupation they would be allowed to hold free elections.
			Disarmament
				All countries were encouraged to Disarm to avoid another war.
	Soviet expansion into Eastern Europe to 1948
		General Formula
			Communist parties resist German occupation
			The Red Army occupies eastern Europe.
			Communist parties supported by the Red Army, pro-German groups eliminated.
			Communist leaders emerge. Many spent the war in Moscow.
			Coalition governments set up
			Communists force non-communists out of power. By 1949 all countries behind the Iron Curtain are one party
			Communist states under Soviet control.
		Yugoslavia 1945
		Albania 1945
		Poland 1947
			Soviet troops remained after liberation
			New government formed in June 1945 dominated by 'Lublin' poles
			
			Opposition leaders arrested and murdered
			
		Romania 1947
			Soviet troops remained after liberation
			
			Soviets accepted a coalition government in 1945, accepting key positions for communists
			
			Rigged elections in 1946 gave the communists and their allies 90% of the vote
			"Show trial" of main opposition leader in October 1947
			
			King Michael forced to abdicate in December
			
			New constitutions in 1947 effectively destroyed parliamentary democracy and opposition parties and disbanded
			
		Bulgaria 1947
			Soviet troops remained after liberation
			
			Initially joined a coalition with other parties the fatherland Front
			
			Monarchy abolished in 1946
		Hungary 1948
			Soviet troops remained after liberation
			Communists won 17% of the vote in November 1945 elections but were given control of the ministry of the Interior
			Used secret police to discredit and persecute rival politicians and parties
			
			Rigged elections in 1947 gave communists control of a coalition government
			
			Social Democratic Party and Communist Party merged in 1948
			
		Czechoslovakia 1948
			Soviets troops left after the war
			
			Post-war elections gave communists leadership of a balances coalition government
			
			Gradually assumed control of key government ministries allowing them to arrest political opponents
			
			Foreign Minister Jans Masaryk, a popular and non-communist politician, murdered in May 1947
			
			All non-communist members of the government resigned in February 1948 (communists filling vacant positions)
			
		East Germany 1949
	The Berlin Blockade
		Long Term Causes
			Berlin was in the heart of Soviet controlled East Germany
			The Soviet union ensured that the minority communist group took control of their eastern zone.
			The west wanted to speed up the economic recovery of Germany
		Short Term Causes
			West German state and the Western Deutschmark introduced, Ostmark introduced as a result
			Soviets walked out of the Allied Control Commission
			Allied zone is included in the Marshall Plan.
			Bizone is created
			The Soviets cut off all road, rail and canal traffic into West Berlin
		During
			Took pace from 28th June 1948 to May 5th 1949
			Rail, Road and canal routes were blocked off so the allies resulted to air. Every 30 seconds planes would bring supplies, 5000 tones were dropped everyday. This must of cost the allies significantly but helped to make a strong political move to avoid a communist take over.
			
			65 German, British and American lives were lost during the operation to keep the city alive
			
			Afterwards Stalin tested their atomic bomb ending the USA superiority in the field and evening out the playing field and reducing the USA's power. (mutually assured destruction)
			
			
		Consequences
			Increased rivalry
			Confirmed division of Germany and Berlin - Federal Republic of Germany and Democratic German Republic created
			NATO
			Changed perception of Germans in the West
		Loose ends
			Warsaw Pact 1949
			Soviet atomic bomb 1949
			China becomes communist 1949
			Communists vs nationalists
			Korean War 1950-55
			McCarthyism in the USA